Add alpha instructions to the `ruff_python_formatter` README (#7064)
astral-sh/ruff: crates/ruff_python_formatter/README.md

extension as your default Python formatter:

```json
{
  "ruff.enableExperimentalFormatter": true,
  "[python]": {
    "editor.defaultFormatter": "charliermarsh.ruff"
  }
}
```

From there, you can format a file by running the `Format Document` command, or enable formatting
on-save by adding `"editor.formatOnSave": true` to your `settings.json`:

```json
{
  "ruff.enableExperimentalFormatter": true,
  "[python]": {
    "editor.defaultFormatter": "charliermarsh.ruff",
    "editor.formatOnSave": true
  }
}
```

## Black compatibility

The formatter is designed to be a drop-in replacement for [Black](https://github.com/psf/black).

Specifically, the formatter is intended to emit near-identical output when run over Black-formatted
code. When migrating an existing project from Black to Ruff, you should expect to see a few
differences on the margins, but the vast majority of your code should be formatted identically.
Note, however, that the formatter does not yet implement or support Black's preview style.

When run over _non_-Black-formatted code, the formatter makes some different decisions than Black,
and so more deviations should be expected.

### Known deviations

> ...

Author: What do you think is the right format here? Just copy over the deviations we started cataloging in Notion, and then use this as the source of truth? It's nice to set this up such that we can link to sections here when folks file issues with known deviations.

# Ruff Formatter

The Ruff formatter is an extremely fast Python code formatter that ships as part of the `ruff`
CLI (as of Ruff v0.0.287).

The formatter is currently in an **alpha** state. As such, it's not yet recommended for production

> use, but it _is_ ready for experimentation and testing. _We'd love to have your feedback._

Author: This would be a good use-case for issue templates...

## Goals

The formatter is designed to be a drop-in replacement for [Black](https://github.com/psf/black),

> but with an excessive focus on performance and direct integration with Ruff.

Reviewer: We may need to be careful with the framing around *direct integration* with Ruff depending on the outcome of our outstanding discussion on aligning the configuration / CLI interface.

Specifically, the formatter is intended to emit near-identical output when run over Black-formatted

> code, achieving Jaccard similarity scores of over 0.999 on extensive Black-formatted projects like

Reviewer: TODO: Add explanation link for Jaccard similarity

Reviewer 2: i'm fine with stating this as ">99.9% of lines on projects [...] are formatted identical to black", the exact metric chosen doesn't correlate strongly with the user experience.

Django and Zulip. When migrating an existing project from Black to Ruff, you should expect to see
a few differences on the margins, but the vast majority of your code should be formatted
identically.

If you identify deviations in your project, spot-check them against the [intentional deviations](#intentional-deviations)
enumerated below, as well as the [unintentional deviations](https://github.com/astral-sh/ruff/issues?q=is%3Aopen+is%3Aissue+label%3Aformatter)

> filed in the issue tracker. If you've identified a new deviation, feel free to [file an issue](https://github.com/astral-sh/ruff/issues/new).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
filed in the issue tracker. If you've identified a new deviation, please [file an issue](https://github.com/astral-sh/ruff/issues/new).
```

When run over _non_-Black-formatted code, the formatter makes some different decisions than Black,
and so more deviations should be expected, especially around the treatment of end-of-line comments.
For details, see [Black compatibility](#black-compatibility).

## Getting started

The Ruff formatter shipped in an alpha state as part of Ruff v0.0.287.

### CLI

The Ruff formatter is available as a standalone subcommand on the `ruff` CLI:

```console
❯ ruff format --help
Run the Ruff formatter on the given files or directories

Usage: ruff format [OPTIONS] [FILES]...

Arguments:
  [FILES]...  List of files or directories to format

Options:
      --check
          Avoid writing any formatted files back; instead, exit with a non-zero status code if any files would have been modified, and zero otherwise
  -o, --output-file <OUTPUT_FILE>

>           Specify file to write the formatter output to (default: stdout)

Reviewer: What's the use case for this option? What gets written to the file when using `ruff format --check --o file.txt`?

The default isn't correct. The default is to overwrite the input file.

Author: Ah yeah, we should probably remove this. It may write the formatter output (but not the changed file), or nothing at all.

      --target-version <TARGET_VERSION>

>           The minimum Python version that should be supported [possible values: py37, py38, py39, py310, py311, py312]

Reviewer: The formatter only supports [Python version that supports parenthesized with items, Py311]. I think we should remove this option for now.

Author: Is it the case that we would add parentheses that weren’t already present here?

      --config <CONFIG>
          Path to the `pyproject.toml` or `ruff.toml` file to use for configuration
  -h, --help
          Print help

File selection:
      --respect-gitignore  Respect file exclusions via `.gitignore` and other standard ignore files
      --force-exclude      Enforce exclusions, even for paths passed to Ruff directly on the command-line

Miscellaneous:
      --isolated                         Ignore all configuration files
      --stdin-filename <STDIN_FILENAME>  The name of the file when passing it through stdin

Log levels:
  -v, --verbose  Enable verbose logging
  -q, --quiet    Print lint violations, but nothing else
  -s, --silent   Disable all logging (but still exit with status code "1" upon detecting lint violations)
```

Note: `ruff format` is currently hidden by default and will not be visible when running
`ruff --help`.

Similar to Black, running `ruff format /path/to/file.py` will format the given file or directory
in-place, while `ruff format --check /path/to/file.py` will avoid writing any formatted files back,
instead exiting with a non-zero status code if any files are not already formatted.

> In future releases, the Ruff formatter will be integrated into `ruff check`.

Reviewer: I would not make this promise today because there's an outstanding discussion about whether we want to do this (we're leaning towards yes, but it comes back to how tightly we want to integrate the formatter into ruff)

### VS Code

As of `v2023.34.0`,
the [Ruff VS Code extension](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=charliermarsh.ruff)
ships with support for the Ruff formatter. To enable formatting capabilities, set the
`ruff.enableExperimentalFormatter` setting to `true` in your `settings.json`, and mark the Ruff
extension as your default Python formatter:

```json
{
  "ruff.enableExperimentalFormatter": true,
  "[python]": {

>     "editor.defaultFormatter": "charliermarsh.ruff"

Reviewer: TODO for the future: Rename the extension to `astral.ruff`?

  }
}
```

From there, you can format a file by running the `Format Document` command, or enable formatting
on-save by adding `"editor.formatOnSave": true` to your `settings.json`:

```json
{
  "ruff.enableExperimentalFormatter": true,
  "[python]": {
    "editor.defaultFormatter": "charliermarsh.ruff",
    "editor.formatOnSave": true
  }
}

> ```

Reviewer: Should we add a note that we plan to add range formatting in future releases?

### Configuration

The Ruff formatter respects Ruff's [`line-length`](https://beta.ruff.rs/docs/settings/#line-length)
setting, which can be provided via a `pyproject.toml` or `ruff.toml` file, or on the CLI, as with

> `ruff check`.

Reviewer: The *on the CLI* is unclear to me. How can I provide the line length via the CLI?

In future releases, the Ruff formatter will likely support configuration of quote style (single vs.

> double) and indentation (width, and spaces vs. tabs).

Reviewer: Depending on how complete the list should be:

* missing semicolons
* line ending
* tab width

> ### Suppressing formatting

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Excluding code from formatting
```

stable style. (Unintentional deviations are tracked in the [issue tracker](https://github.com/astral-sh/ruff/issues?q=is%3Aopen+is%3Aissue+label%3Aformatter).)

#### Trailing end-of-line comments

Black's priority is to fit an entire statement on a line, even if it contains end-of-line comments.
In such cases, Black collapses the statement, and moves the comment to the end of the collapsed
statement:

```python
# Input
while (
    cond1  # almost always true
    and cond2  # almost never true
):
    print("Do something")

# Black
while cond1 and cond2:  # almost always true  # almost never true
    print("Do something")
```

Ruff, like [Prettier](https://prettier.io/), expands any statement that contains trailing
end-of-line comments. For example, Ruff would avoid collapsing the `while` test in the snippet
above. This ensures that the comments remain close to their original position and retain their
original intent, at the cost of retaining additional vertical space.

This deviation only impacts unformatted code, in that Ruff's output should not deviate for code that
has already been formatted by Black.

### Pragma comments are ignored when computing line width

> Pragma comments (`# type: ignore`, `# noqa`, etc.) are ignored when computing the width of a line.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Pragma comments (`# type:`, `# noqa`, `pyright:`, and `pylint:`) are ignored when computing the width of a line.
```

Reviewer 2: I like `# type: ignore`, you shouldn't be using other type comments anymore (they were a python 2 compatibility layer)

Reviewer: The reason I would change it is because the formatter excludes all comments starting with `type: ` from the measured width, not just `type: ignore`

This prevents Ruff from moving pragma comments around, thereby modifying their meaning and behavior:

See Ruff's [pargma comment handling proposal](https://github.com/astral-sh/ruff/discussions/6670)
for details.

This is similar to [Pyink](https://github.com/google/pyink) but a deviation from Black. Black uses

> this behavior for `# type: ignore` comments ([#997](https://github.com/psf/black/issues/997)), while

Reviewer: Black's behavior for `type: ignore` is different: It avoids splitting any line that has a type ignore comment, limiting formatting mainly to normalizing spaces.

Ruff applies it to all such pragmas.

As Ruff expands trailing end-of-line comments, Ruff will also avoid moving pragma comments in cases
like the following, where moving the `# noqa` to the end of the line causes it to suppress errors
on both `first()` and `second()`:

```python
# Input
[
    first(),  # noqa
    second()
]

# Black
[first(), second()]  # noqa

# Ruff
[
    first(),  # noqa
    second(),
]
```

### Line width vs. line length

Ruff uses the unicode width of a line to determine if a line fits. Black's stable style uses
character width, while Black's preview style uses unicode width for strings ([#3445](https://github.com/psf/black/pull/3445)),

> and character width for all other tokens.

Reviewer: It may be worth specifying the main difference is that Ruff uses the unicode width for identifiers and comments in addition to strings (Black)

```python
# Input
x[y:=1]

# Black
x[y:=1]
```

Ruff will instead add space around the `:=` operator:

```python
# Input
x[y:=1]

# Ruff
x[y := 1]
```

This will likely be incorporated into Black's preview style ([#3823](https://github.com/psf/black/pull/3823)).

### `global` and `nonlocal` names are broken across multiple lines by continuations

If a `global` or `nonlocal` statement includes multiple names, and exceeds the configured line
width, Ruff will break them across multiple lines using continuations:

```python
# Input
global analyze_featuremap_layer, analyze_featuremapcompression_layer, analyze_latencies_post, analyze_motions_layer, analyze_size_model

# Ruff
global \
    analyze_featuremap_layer, \
    analyze_featuremapcompression_layer, \
    analyze_latencies_post, \
    analyze_motions_layer, \
    analyze_size_model
```

### Newlines are inserted after single-quoted docstrings

Black typically enforces a single newline after a class docstring. However, it does not apply such
formatting if the docstring is single-quoted rather than triple-quoted, while Ruff enforces a
single newline in both cases:

```python
# Input
class IntFromGeom(GEOSFuncFactory):

>     """Argument is a geometry, return type is an integer."""

Reviewer 3: I think this docstring should be single-quoted, given the above description?

Author: Thank you!

    argtypes = [GEOM_PTR]
    restype = c_int
    errcheck = staticmethod(check_minus_one)

# Black
class IntFromGeom(GEOSFuncFactory):
    """Argument is a geometry, return type is an integer."""
    argtypes = [GEOM_PTR]
    restype = c_int
    errcheck = staticmethod(check_minus_one)

# Ruff
class IntFromGeom(GEOSFuncFactory):
    """Argument is a geometry, return type is an integer."""

    argtypes = [GEOM_PTR]
    restype = c_int
    errcheck = staticmethod(check_minus_one)
```

### Trailing own-line comments on imports are not moved to the next line

Black enforces a single empty line between an import and a trailing own-line comment. Ruff leaves
such comments in-place:

```python
# Input
import os
# comment

import sys

# Black
import os

# comment

import sys

# Ruff
import os
# comment

import sys

> ```

Reviewer: Is the goal to document all deviations or the most prominent once? There are e.g. some more string formatting deviations https://www.notion.so/astral-sh/Black-Deviations-65977bec23b64aee9d28cc1787badfdb?pvs=4#df068d4a5638465ab95e944f45daac55
